module: exports patterns (#34718)
nodejs/node: doc/api/packages.md

// Throws ERR_PACKAGE_PATH_NOT_EXPORTED
```

### Subpath export patterns

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

Explicitly listing each exports subpath entry is recommended for packages with
a small number of exports. But for packages that have very large numbers of
subpaths this can start to cause package.json bloat and maintenanec issues.

For these use cases, subpath export patterns can be used instead:

```json
// ./node_modules/es-module-package/package.json
{
  "exports": {
    "./features/*": "./src/features/*.js"
  }
}
```

> The left hand matching pattern must always end in `*`, and all instances of `*`

Reviewer: is there going to be a first-part-code warning for authors that omit the star and just end with a slash?

Author: I think we can complete this process in phases. This PR now effectively includes a "quiet" docs deprecation.

The next phase would be to make an explicit deprecation with potential warnings, then finally to remove the implementation.

There are now 4464 packages on npm shipping exports so I don't think we want to rush this or start emitting warnings yet. It will be a multi-major process at this point so I want to focus on getting the baseline out first and then follow up with the phased deprecation work.

on the right hand side will then be replaced with this value, including if it
contains any `/` separators.

```js
import featureX from 'es-module-package/features/x';
// Loads ./node_modules/es-module-package/src/features/x.js

import featureY from 'es-module-package/features/y/y';
// Loads ./node_modules/es-module-package/src/features/y/y.js
```

> The import property of exports being statically predetermined is maintained with

Reviewer: “import property of exports”? not sure what this is trying to say.

Author: Thanks this was supposed to be "important". I've done some further rewording as well.

// Throws ERR_PACKAGE_PATH_NOT_EXPORTED
```

### Subpath export patterns

> Stability: 1 - Experimental

Explicitly listing each exports subpath entry is recommended for packages with
a small number of exports. But for packages that have very large numbers of
subpaths this can start to cause package.json bloat and maintenanec issues.

For these use cases, subpath export patterns can be used instead:

```json
// ./node_modules/es-module-package/package.json
{
  "exports": {

>     "./features/*": "./src/features/*.js"

Reviewer: Confirming: `*` matches `/` as well? Would maybe we want to make `*` not match `/`, and `**` match `/`? That way you could control whether you had nested patterns or not.

Reviewer 2: I think I would rather make it `(.*)` since that's the other common (and more modern) way to write "splats" in route definitions. The current syntax matches what express <=4 (?) used. I think using glob-style patterns would imply expansion, not 1-to-1 mapping.

Reviewer: These are file paths, not route definitions, in which double-star globbing is exceedingly common. Why would express routing patterns be appropriate here?

Author: Exports patterns are not file paths, they are effectively a relative URL space (including URI encoding) that apply a mapping to a file space, so routes are a fairly good analogy.

Reviewer: If it's going to match express' routing DSL, then that's a different story (including path segment awareness), but I don't think it would make sense to only partially mimic express.

Author: @ljharb `*` will match any separators yes. But if anything the right hand side is more what should be thought of as a glob since replacing the `*` in the right hand side with `**` is what will give you the file system glob to enumerate the exports of the package.

Your comment also triggered another question though which I hadn't considered. And that is that:

```json
{
  "exports": {
    "./*": "./*"
  }
}
```

is clearly defined to only match explicit subpaths of the package. That is, `import.meta.resolve('pkg/')` would not resolve that export mapping (currently it throws with this PR, unlike "./") and therefore, interestingly, if `./` path mappings are deprecated could this could be extended to always resolve the package base in a subsequent PR if we want to.

Reviewer: I'm confused, why would that be different? A `*` can always be empty.

Author: This PR explicitly requires some text to be matched on the LHS for the `*`. If you write:

```json
{
  "exports": {
    "./components-*": "./components/*.js"
  }
}
```

it will match `pkg/components-x` but `pkg/components-` will throw a package path not exported error instead of trying to map into `components/.js` and throwing a not found.

Reviewer: That seems very confusing, and not how `*` works in literally every other context everywhere.

  }
}
```

The left hand matching pattern must always end in `*`, and all instances of `*`
on the right hand side will then be replaced with this value, including if it
contains any `/` separators.

```js
import featureX from 'es-module-package/features/x';
// Loads ./node_modules/es-module-package/src/features/x.js

import featureY from 'es-module-package/features/y/y';
// Loads ./node_modules/es-module-package/src/features/y/y.js
```

This is a direct static replacement without any special handling for file
extensions. In the previous example, `pkg/features/x.json` would be resolved to

> `./src/featrues/x.json.js` in the mapping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`./src/features/x.json.js` in the mapping.
```

should be moved to another folder to retain the encapsulation
benefits of exports.

> To support automatic file extensions with folder mappings, a substituation

Reviewer 2: Can we add a warning that this will always append the extension, even if the path already has one? E.g. I wouldn't want people to expect that `pkg/features/x.json` would end up as anything but `pkg/features/x.json.js`.

Also, maybe something like this to distinguish this from the existing use of "automatic file extensions" where it's based on a list of possible extensions & file existence:

```suggestion
To support adding file extensions inside of folder mappings, a substituation
```

Reviewer 3: [](https://github.com/nodejs/node-addon-api)

rule can be specified with a `*` pattern replacement:

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
{
  "exports": {
    "./features/*": "./src/features/*.js"
  }
}
```

These pattern replacements are only supported for an exports entry ending
in `*`. On the right hand target path, any number of `*` replacements are

> supported, which all correspond to replacements of the match from the left
> hand key.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
supported, which all correspond to replacements of the match from the left
hand key.

Note that this is a static replacement and doesn't have special handling for
file extensions. Using the previous example mapping, `pkg/features/x.json`
would be resolved to `./src/featrues/x.json.js`.
```
